Add file CONTRIBUTING.md (#463)
rpm-software-management/dnf5: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contributing Guide

* [Ways to contribute](#ways-to-contribute)
* [Finding an issue](#finding-an-issue)
* [Asking for help](#asking-for-help)
* [Submitting a contribution](#submitting-a-contribution)
* [Setting up a development environment](#setting-up-a-development-environment)
* [Pull request checklist](#pull-request-checklist)

Welcome to the DNF5 project! We are glad that you want to contribute!

We welcome your feedback on different areas of our project, including the following:

* Problems found during a new developer environment setup.

> * Gaps in the Quickstart Guide or other documentation.

Reviewer: What is the `Quickstart Guide`? Is it referring to this docs or something else?

Author: it's inaccurate, right, it comes from the template I used. I would change it to "Gaps in our documentation"

      * If you are ready for a code review by one of the maintainers, set the
        [_ready for review_](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/ready%20for%20review) label.
2. Review the PR.
   1. Discuss the PR with one of the maintainers. Note that the maintainers might request some changes.
   2. Review the PR again.
3. Merge the PR.

## Setting up a development environment

To setup a development environment, complete the following steps:

1. Install build requirements:

   ```
   dnf builddep dnf5.spec #[--define '_without_<option> 1 ...]
   ```

2. Build DNF5:

   ```
   mkdir build
   cd build
   cmake ..
   # or cmake .. [-DWITH_<OPTION>=<ON|OFF> ...]
   make
   ```

3. Run the unit-tests. To run the tests, follow the steps to build the code and then run this code:

   ```
   # from the 'build' directory
   CTEST_OUTPUT_ON_FAILURE=1 make test
   ```

   Alternatively, you can execute tests in a verbose mode:

   ```
   # from the 'build' directory
   make test ARGS='-V'
   ```

4. Install DNF5. To install the built package, we recommend to build an rpm package.

   You can build the rpm package either of the following ways:

>    - Build the rpms by using tito:
> 
>      ```
>      tito build --rpm --test
>      ```
> 
>    - Build the rpms from git:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Build the rpm by using tito:

     ```
     tito build --rpm --test
     ```

   - Build the rpm from git:
```

Author: it's actually more than one rpm being built

     ```
     export PREFIX=$(rpmspec dnf5.spec -q --srpm --qf '%{name}-%{version}'); git archive --format=tar.gz --prefix=$PREFIX/ HEAD > $PREFIX.tar.gz
     rpmbuild -ba --define "_sourcedir $(pwd)" dnf5.spec #[--with=<option>|--without=<option> ...]
     ```

## Pull request checklist

When you submit your pull request or push new commits to it, our automated
systems will run some checks on your new code. We require that your pull request
passes these checks. However, note that there are more criteria that your pull request must pass before we can
accept and merge it. We recommend that you ensure the following locally
before you submit your code:

* Code must build.

  Ensure that your code builds [locally](#setting-up-a-development-environment) unless you need some help from us or you need us

>   to review work in progress changes..

Reviewer: Doubled dot: `..` -> `.`

* Code must be tested.

  If your pull request includes new or modified functionality within the library, we kindly request that you provide
  matching unit tests in the project's test directory to cover these changes. However, if the changes only affect
  the command-line interface, you can provide related CI tests in the
  [ci-dnf-stack](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/ci-dnf-stack) component.
  If you need our assistance, ask the maintainers for help.

> * Code must pass sanity checks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Code must pass sanity checks.
```

# Contributing Guide

* [New Contributor Guide](#contributing-guide)
  * [Ways to Contribute](#ways-to-contribute)
  * [Find an Issue](#find-an-issue)
  * [Ask for Help](#ask-for-help)
  * [Pull Request Lifecycle](#pull-request-lifecycle)
  * [Development Environment Setup](#development-environment-setup)
    * [Requirements](#requirements)
    * [Build](#build)
    * [Install](#install)
    * [Test](#test)
  * [Pull Request Checklist](#pull-request-checklist)

Welcome! We are glad that you want to contribute to our project!

As you get started, you are in the best position to give us feedback on areas of
our project that we need help with including:

> * Problems found during setting up a new developer environment
> * Gaps in our Quickstart Guide or documentation
> * Bugs in our automation scripts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Problems found during a new developer environment setup.
* Gaps in our Quickstart Guide or documentation.
* Bugs in our automation scripts.
```

* Our mailing list [sst-cs-software-management@redhat.com](mailto:sst-cs-software-management@redhat.coms)
* On IRC [#dnf](ircs://chat.libera.org/dnf)

## Pull Request Lifecycle

Once you have a contribution ready, follow these steps:
- Submit the PR
  - Set the [labels](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels) accordingly
  - If you need help while working on it you could set
    [work in progess](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/work%20in%20progress)
    and wait for the PR to be triaged.
  - If you are ready for a code review by one of the maintaineres set the label
    [ready for review](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/ready%20for%20review)
- Triaging happens usually on Mondays or Thursdays
- Review!
  - Discuss the pr with one of the maintainers
  - Some changes might be requested
  - Review again
- Merge!

## Development Environment Setup

#### Requirements

To install build requirements, run:
```
dnf builddep dnf5.spec #[--define '_without_<option> 1 ...]
```

#### Build

To build DNF5, run:

```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
# or cmake .. [-DWITH_<OPTION>=<ON|OFF> ...]
make
```

#### Test

> To run the tests, follow the steps to build the code and then run::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run the tests, follow the steps to build the code and then run:
```

```
# from the 'build' directory
CTEST_OUTPUT_ON_FAILURE=1 make test
```

> As an alternative, tests can be executed in a verbose mode::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an alternative, tests can be executed in a verbose mode:
```

```
# from the 'build' directory
make test ARGS='-V'
```

#### Install

> To install the built package we recommend building an rpm package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To install the built package, we recommend building an rpm package.
```

> To build rpms using tito run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To build rpms using tito, run:
```

```
tito build --rpm --test
```

To build rpms from git, run:

```
export PREFIX=$(rpmspec dnf5.spec -q --srpm --qf '%{name}-%{version}'); git archive --format=tar.gz --prefix=$PREFIX/ HEAD > $PREFIX.tar.gz
rpmbuild -ba --define "_sourcedir $(pwd)" dnf5.spec #[--with=<option>|--without=<option> ...]
```

## Pull Request Checklist

When you submit your pull request, or you push new commits to it, our automated
systems will run some checks on your new code. We require that your pull request
passes these checks, but we also have more criteria than just that before we can
accept and merge it. We recommend that you check the following things locally
before you submit your code:

### Code should build
Unless you need some help from us or you need us to review work in progress changes.
Otherwise, please, [test it locally](#development-environment-setup)

> 

Reviewer: I'd suggest to also cover added functionality with unit tests. Something like this?

### Code should be tested

If your pull request includes new or modified functionality within the library, we kindly request that you provide matching unit tests in the project's `test` directory to cover these changes. However, if the changes only affect the command-line interface, you may provide related CI tests in the [ci-dnf-stack](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/ci-dnf-stack) component. If you need assistance with this, please feel free to ask the maintainers for help.

Author: I added the section, will push an updated version in a moment

# Contributing Guide

* [New Contributor Guide](#contributing-guide)
  * [Ways to Contribute](#ways-to-contribute)
  * [Find an Issue](#find-an-issue)
  * [Ask for Help](#ask-for-help)
  * [Pull Request Lifecycle](#pull-request-lifecycle)
  * [Development Environment Setup](#development-environment-setup)

>     * [Requirements](#requirements)

Reviewer: These links under #development-environment-setup section seem not to lead anywhere ...

# Contributing Guide

* [New Contributor Guide](#contributing-guide)
  * [Ways to Contribute](#ways-to-contribute)
  * [Find an Issue](#find-an-issue)
  * [Ask for Help](#ask-for-help)
  * [Pull Request Lifecycle](#pull-request-lifecycle)
  * [Development Environment Setup](#development-environment-setup)
    * [Requirements](#requirements)
    * [Build](#build)
    * [Install](#install)
    * [Test](#test)
  * [Pull Request Checklist](#pull-request-checklist)

Welcome! We are glad that you want to contribute to our project!

> As you get started, you are in the best position to give us feedback on areas of
> our project that we need help with including:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We welcome your feedback on different areas of our project including the following:
```

Just trying to make it a bit more simple.

* Problems found during a new developer environment setup.

> * Gaps in our Quickstart Guide or documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Gaps in our Quickstart Guide or other documentation.
```
If that makes sense.

* Bugs in our automation scripts.

> If anything doesn't make sense, or doesn't work when you run it, please open a
> [issue](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/issues/new) and let us know!
> If you file a bug on Fedora you could open a bug on
> [Bugzilla](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/enter_bug.cgi?product=Fedora&component=dnf5).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are experiencing problems with our project, let us know by opening an 
[issue](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/issues/new) and let us know!
If you want to file a bug on Fedora, you can open the bug in
[Bugzilla](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/enter_bug.cgi?product=Fedora&component=dnf5).
```

Not sure if all my suggestions make sense here, though :-)  Other option is to replace "with our project" with "the DNF5 package manager".

## Ways to Contribute

We welcome many different types of contributions including:

* [New features](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/RFE)
* [Bug fixes](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/buglist.cgi?bug_status=__open__&product=Fedora&component=dnf5)
* [Documentation](https://dnf5.readthedocs.io)
* [Issue Triage](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/issues)
* [Copr Builds](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/rpmsoftwaremanagement/), [CI/CD](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/actions)
* [Communications](#ask-for-help) / [GH Discussions](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/discussions)

## Find an Issue

> We have good first issues for new contributors and help wanted issues suitable
> for any contributor. Issues labeled as
> [good first issue](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/good%20first%20issue)
> are issues suitable for someone who isn't a core maintainer and wants to get familiar with the codebase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are a new contributor, you can search for issues with the [_good first issue_](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/good%20first%20issue) label. These issues are suitable for contributors who are not core maintainers and want to get familiar with the codebase.

If you are a regular contributor, you can search for issues with the _help wanted_ label.
```

Here, I'm not sure if I interpreted the info in the correct way :-D Also, would it be possible to add also the link to the _help wanted_ issues search result similarly to what you have for _good first issue_?

Author: you are correct; however, we have a change in the workflow now, so I will simply remove the last line "If you are a regular contributor... wanted label." since this piece of information is not valid anymore

Reviewer 2: Oki, got it :-)

> Sometimes there won’t be any issues with these labels. That’s ok! There is
> likely still something for you to work on. If you want to contribute but you
> don’t know where to start or can't find a suitable issue, you can ask for help by reaching out on one of our
> [channels](#ask-for-help).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that sometimes there can be no issues with the _good first issue_ or _help wanted_ label. Do not worry! There is likely still something for you to work on. If you want to contribute but you
do not know where to start or cannot find a suitable issue, ask for help by reaching out on one of our
[channels](#ask-for-help).
```

> If you see an issue that you'd like to work on, please post a comment saying
> that you want to work on it and assign yourself.
> Something like "I want to work on this" is fine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there is an issue that you would like like to work on, add a comment saying
that you want to work on this issue, for example, "I want to work on this", and assign the issue to yourself.
```

Not sure about the "assign the issue to yourself"..Does that sound correct?

## Ask for Help

The best way to reach us with a question when contributing is to ask on:

* The original github issue
* Our mailing list [sst-cs-software-management@redhat.com](mailto:sst-cs-software-management@redhat.coms)
* On IRC [#dnf](irc:/chat.libera.org/#dnf)

## Pull Request Lifecycle

Once you have a contribution ready, follow these steps:
- Submit the PR

>   - Set the [labels](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels) accordingly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Set the [labels](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels) accordingly.
```

  - If you need help while working on it you could set
    [work in progess](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/work%20in%20progress)
    and wait for the PR to be triaged.
  - If you are ready for a code review by one of the maintaineres set the label

>     [ready for review](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/ready%20for%20review)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [ready for review](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/ready%20for%20review).
```

> Once you have a contribution ready, follow these steps:
> - Submit the PR
>   - Set the [labels](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels) accordingly.
>   - If you need help while working on it you could set
>     [work in progess](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/work%20in%20progress)
>     and wait for the PR to be triaged.
>   - If you are ready for a code review by one of the maintaineres set the label
>     [ready for review](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/ready%20for%20review).
> - Triaging happens usually on Mondays or Thursdays
> - Review!
>   - Discuss the pr with one of the maintainers.
>   - Some changes might be requested.
>   - Review again.
> - Merge!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have a contribution ready, complete the following steps:
- Submit a pull request (PR).
  - Set the necessary [labels](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels).
  - If you need help while working on the PR, set the
    [_work in progess_](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/work%20in%20progress) label
    and wait for the PR to be triaged.
  - If you are ready for a code review by one of the maintainers, set the
    [_ready for review_](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/labels/ready%20for%20review) label.
    Triaging usually happens on Mondays or Thursdays.
- Review the PR.
  - Discuss the PR with one of the maintainers. Note that some changes might be requested.
  - Review again.
- Merge the PR.
```

I would also use the numbered list for the main steps. This ensures that folks go step by step and do not perform these steps in a different order (even though it is obvious that those steps should be performed one by one :-D ) But this is just a suggestion :-)

Author: I like the suggestion, I'll make the change

## Development Environment Setup

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To setup a development environment, complete the following steps:
```

#### Requirements

To install build requirements, run:
```
dnf builddep dnf5.spec #[--define '_without_<option> 1 ...]
```

#### Build

To build DNF5, run:

```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
# or cmake .. [-DWITH_<OPTION>=<ON|OFF> ...]
make
```

#### Test

To run the tests, follow the steps to build the code and then run:

```
# from the 'build' directory
CTEST_OUTPUT_ON_FAILURE=1 make test
```

As an alternative, tests can be executed in a verbose mode:

```
# from the 'build' directory
make test ARGS='-V'
```

#### Install

To install the built package, we recommend building an rpm package.

To build rpms using tito, run:
```
tito build --rpm --test
```

To build rpms from git, run:

```
export PREFIX=$(rpmspec dnf5.spec -q --srpm --qf '%{name}-%{version}'); git archive --format=tar.gz --prefix=$PREFIX/ HEAD > $PREFIX.tar.gz
rpmbuild -ba --define "_sourcedir $(pwd)" dnf5.spec #[--with=<option>|--without=<option> ...]
```

## Pull Request Checklist

> When you submit your pull request, or you push new commits to it, our automated
> systems will run some checks on your new code. We require that your pull request
> passes these checks, but we also have more criteria than just that before we can
> accept and merge it. We recommend that you check the following things locally
> before you submit your code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you submit your pull request or push new commits to it, our automated
systems will run some checks on your new code. We require that your pull request
passes these checks. However, note that there are more criteria that your pull request must pass before we can
accept and merge it. We recommend that you ensure the following locally
before you submit your code:
```

Reviewer 2: I would also turn the following two criteria into the bulleted list as follows:

- Code builds.
  Unless you 
  [Test your code locally](#development-environment-setup) unless you need our help or want us to review
  your _work in progress_ changes.
- Code is tested.
  If your pull request includes a new or modified functionality within the library, provide
  matching unit tests in the project's test directory to cover the changes. However, if the changes only affect
  the command-line interface, you can provide related CI tests in the
  [ci-dnf-stack](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/ci-dnf-stack) component.
  If you need our assistance, ask the maintainers for help.
- Code passed sanity checks.

And so on. Does that sound ok?

Author: sounds good

### Code should build

Unless you need some help from us or you need us to review work in progress changes.

> Otherwise, please, [test it locally](#development-environment-setup)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, please, [test it locally](#development-environment-setup).
```

### Code should be tested

If your pull request includes new or modified functionality within the library, we kindly request that you provide
matching unit tests in the project's test directory to cover these changes. However, if the changes only affect
the command-line interface, you may provide related CI tests in the
[ci-dnf-stack](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/ci-dnf-stack) component.

> If you need assistance with this, please feel free to ask the maintainers for help

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need assistance with this, please feel free to ask the maintainers for help.
```

### Code should pass sanity checks

Test the sanity of the codebase by performing [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) checks.

> Inside `dnf5` directory run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the dnf5` directory, run:
```

```bash
pre-commit install

> git add yourchanges
> git commit -m "your commit"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
git add _<yourchanges>_
git commit -m "_<your commit>_"
```

This is how we usually express the replaceable values.

Author: not sure that the italic would format inside the code block but i'll try

...
check the results, all light should be green

```

> All these checks will run in as part of a PR action on GitHub, so be sure not to skip it if you don't want to
> amend your contribution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All these checks will run as part of a PR action on GitHub. Therefore, make sure not to skip the checks if you do not want to amend your contribution.
```

As part of pre-commit checks we perform checks such as trailing whitespaces, end of file fixes, clang-format and rpmlint
checks. See [.pre-commit-config.yml](https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/blob/main/.pre-commit-config.yaml)

> for more info.

Reviewer: Another thing occurred to me in this context. Maybe we could add a note about adding a proper description of the changes in the commit message and PR description?

Author: oh we could actually setup the commit template. what do you think?
https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf/blob/master/.git-commit-template

Reviewer: But you still need to setup these template manually, right? Because I don't see the template by default using `git commit`. And also it seems not working properly in some IDEs like VS code from the link given.

If it couldn't be automated, I am rather for documenting the suggested format there.

Author: I created an issue to track this point. I believe there is a good margin of improvement and automation if we think this right.

https://github.com/rpm-software-management/dnf5/issues/498
